# I am ending development and support for WadSmoosh

Over 4th of July weekend in 2016, I wrote a little Python utility that would, with the [omgifol library](https://github.com/devinacker/omgifol) doing all the heavy lifting, merge the contents of [doom.wad](https://doomwiki.org/wiki/DOOM.WAD) and [doom2.wad](https://doomwiki.org/wiki/DOOM2.WAD) into a single file you could run with [ZDoom](https://doomwiki.org/wiki/ZDoom), and have all the Classic Doom episodes in a single place, ie without having to relaunch the game with either individual IWAD.

Back then, the version of Doom you could buy on Steam etc was a pretty low-effort packaging of DOSBox with the original DOS executable, and the clearly superior way to experience Doom was to download a [source port](https://doomwiki.org/wiki/Source_port) of your choice, and load in the retail WADs you'd purchased (either from floppies or a CD-ROM back in the day, or from a digital distribution service). Classic Doom wasn't *abandoned* by its corporate owner per se, but it was very much an era where the community was steering the ship: making and sharing WADs, maintaining source ports, and recognizing that work in things like the yearly [Cacowards](https://www.doomworld.com/cacowards). WadSmoosh was one way I could step forward in that community and help both new and existing fans of Doom have the best experience possible, in an explicitly free/open source non-commercial way.

Since then, the landscape has changed somewhat dramatically. id Software, then owned by ZeniMax Media, now in turn owned by Microsoft Gaming, has reasserted their ownership of Doom in multiple ways, including updating the game on modern platforms to a Unity-based port with lots of modern features, repackaging the original games in a very convenient way. And yesterday, they released another major update, with a completely new port that makes all the original retail content accessible from a single game.

After the first couple years of its development when it was adding new features, WadSmoosh has been a pretty quiet project. I decided that John Romero's Sigil releases were official enough to be worth including, and updated WadSmoosh to support those. But aside from things like that, I'd always intended it to be a humble, as-simple-as-possible utilty program, the kind of software that could be called "finished", ie not needing to keep adding new features to justify an upgrade price or subscription fee.

And I think now is as good a time as any to call it done, at least as a project I personally am spending energy to develop and support. A few contributing factors, roughly in order of significance:
* The new port puts 100% of what WadSmoosh supported into a single game that will receive ongoing support by people who are being paid to do so. Most people who want to do the thing I wrote WadSmoosh to do now have a much easier way to play. While I have [significant ethical, creative, and social concerns](https://cohost.org/vectorpoem/post/7228939-okay-i-ve-slept-on) about that port's mod upload functionality, it is clearly now where Doom "lives".
* The new port also adds enough new content (a new episode with new weapons and monsters, a new alternate soundtrack) that the work to support it in WadSmoosh would require 100X more of the time and energy I'm able to spend on it.
* I am very burnt out on shipping Windows executables of my Python programs to users. I use [PyInstaller](https://pyinstaller.org) to do this, which packages up a Python interpreter with my own code, and Windows Defender basically flags any executable made with PyInstaller as malware, because some malware authors use it to make the world a worse place. You can submit a false positive report to Microsoft to (usually) stop this flagging, but doing that for every release is burdensome.
* I am tired of supporting WadSmoosh. Some community folks have been incredibly helpful to me during development, and I appreciate them immensely. But for the most part, supporting software in this particular community context sucks. It has a subjective curatorial aspect that everyone has different opinions on, producing dozens of support requests. The range of peoples' setups vary wildly and some of them are based on data they've clearly pirated. And some people just *do not know* how to communicate with creators in a civil way. It has worn me down.

The nice thing about free + open source software (FOSS), though, is that anyone can fork [the code](https://heptapod.host/jp-lebreton/wadsmoosh) and carry it onward and/or in a new direction. That was always my intention, for it to at least hold a candle to the best Doom community software: free, open, able to be understood and modified by anyone who wanted to. Until It Is Done.

Thank you for the support and encouragement these past 8 years, Doom community.


JP LeBreton

2024-08-10
